README.md, before:

# OpenDKIM genkeys tool

Copyright &copy; 2016 Todd T Knarr &lt;<tknarr@silverglass.org>&gt;

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License (included in
LICENSE.md) for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
this program. If not, see [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/)

## Summary

A tool to help with the generation of DKIM keys for use with OpenDKIM. The standard
`opendkim-genkey` tool is awkward to use, it only generates key data for a single
domain at a time and the file for the public key part that needs populated into the
DNS data, while exactly what's needed for use with BIND, isn't in a format usable by
the web-based interfaces to most DNS hosting providers. It also requires manually
updating the DNS information, a significant task when dealing with the common situation
of multiple domains. This awkwardness occurs repeatedly, since the recommendation for
DKIM is that keys be rotated (new keys generated and old keys retired) every month.

This tool takes a configuration detailing all the domains that need keys and generates
all the keys in a single operation, and for supported DNS hosting provider APIs will
automatically add the new keys to DNS for you. In the process it'll regenerate the two
configuration files OpenDKIM needs that depend on the set of domains and keys involved
and leave you with reasonably clean `.txt` files containing the DNS information for
each domain. File names follow a format that should eliminate overwriting of files
unless you deliberately ask for that.

You will need to be familiar with DKIM and have at least a general familiarity with the
OpenDKIM package before using this tool.

## Usage

    genkeys.py [-h] [-n] [-v] [--no-dns] [selector]

*   `-h` : display help
*   `-n` : use next month instead of this month when automatically generating a selector
*   `-v` : log additional informational messages while processing
*   `--no-dns` : do not attempt to automatically update DNS records

If no `selector` is specified, one will be automatically generated based on the current
month (or the next month if `-n` was used). Standard practice would be to omit the
selector and use automatic date-based selectors (which have the format `YYYYMM`, eg.
`201605` for May of 2016), using `-n` if you're generating the keys for next month
ahead of time and need the selector to reflect the month you're generating for rather
than the current one. If `--no-dns` is used you'll have to manually update the DNS
records with the data in the generated `.txt` files, otherwise the script will try
to automatically update the DNS records for all domains it's got DNS API support and
information for.

The following options are also available for development and debugging. They should
not be used under normal circumstances ("If you don't know what it's going to do, _DO
NOT_ push the button." is a good rule to live by).

*   `--debug` : enable logging of additional debugging information and disable actual actions
    in the DNS API modules (error checking will occur, but no attempt will be made to actually
    actually update the records)
*   `--use-null` : silently use the null DNS API instead of the defined one for all domains

## Configuration files

### `dnsapi.ini`

This file defines the global information needed by all domains hosted somewhere that uses
a given API to allow programmatic updating of DNS records. There's one line per API with
fields within the line separated by whitespace. The first field is always the name of the
API. Following that will be fields containing any data needed by the API that isn't specific
to a particular domain, eg. account authentication keys. If you look at the example file
provided with the scripts, it contains comments describing the setup for the two supported
APIs, `freedns` and `linode`, along with the `null` API used for debugging. Blank lines are
ignored, as are lines which start with a `#` character (comment lines).

A DNS API with a particular name is supported by a module in a file named `dnsapi_X.py`,
where the X is replaced with the name in the first field of the API's line in `dnsapi.ini`.
The names are arbitrary but should be mnemonic, and they aren't hardcoded into the main
script in any way. Additional APIs can be supported merely by creating a `dnsapi_X.py` module
for them and adding an entry to `dnsapi.ini`, the main script will automatically load the
module as needed. Writing these scripts is beyond the scope of this document, you can find
information on the process in the wiki's
[Writing a new DNS API module](https://github.com/tknarr/opendkim-genkeys/wiki/Writing-a-new-DNS-API-module)
page.

### `domains.ini`

This file is the main one that ties domains, key files and DNS APIs together. As with `dnsapi.ini`,
blank lines and lines beginning with `#` are ignored. The first field in each line is the
domain name, the second field is the name identifying the key to be used for that domain, and
the third field if present is the name of the DNS API used by the provider hosting that domain's
DNS. Additional fields may be present after the third containing data specific to that domain's
DNS data needed by the API, eg. domain identifiers telling the provider which of your domains
that particular record is to be added to. Specific details about these fields and how to obtain
the data can be found in the wiki in the provider's entry on the
[DNS APIs page](https://github.com/tknarr/opendkim-genkeys/wiki/DNS-APIs). If no DNS API name is
present, the script won't attempt to automatically update the DNS information and you'll need to
take the information from the generated public key file and update the DNS data manually. If a
DNS API name is present (and the information in `dnsapi.ini` and `domains.ini` is all correct),
the script will use the API to add the new DKIM record automatically (you can suppress this via
the `--no-dns` option).

When selecting key names for each domain, recommended practice is to use a short form of the domain
name or something mnemonic for a group of related domains. Good practice is that you shouldn't use
the same key across many domains, but closely-related domains (eg. `example.com` and `example.net`
when they're just synonyms for each other) might both reasonably use key `example`.

# Generated files

## Private and public key files

Both types of files follow the same pattern for the base filename: the key name, a dot and
the selector value. Private key files have the suffix `.key` and are uploaded to the mail
server to be used for signing outgoing messages. Public key data files have the suffix `.txt`
and contain the text needed in the body of the DKIM DNS TXT record to allow receiving mail
servers to verify the DKIM signature. Private key files are a base64-encoded RSA private key
file (familiar if you've worked with SSL or X.509). The public key data files are also
mostly base64-encoded data, broken up into chunks of less than 255 characters (because of
limitations in the size of the UDP packets most commonly used by DNS) and with each chunk
enclosed in quote marks. That's the format BIND zone files want the data in. Depending on
your DNS software or DNS hosting provider, you may need to reformat the text. Linode, for
example, requires that you remove the quote marks and intervening whitespace, turning the
data into a single long string before putting it in the record's value field. There are too
many possible variations to cover here, if your DNS hosting provider's not supported by a
DNS API module or you need to update DNS software directly you'll need to research what format
is required and look over the `.txt` files to see what you need to do with the data.

## Updated `opendkim` daemon configuration files

OpenDKIM uses two configuration files to control what keys are used to sign outgoing
messages: `signing.table` and `key.table`. `signing.table` is the simplest one, the first
field is a pattern matching email addresses (usually `*@domain` to match all addresses
in a given domain) and the second field is a tag used to determine what key entry will
be used to sign messages matching the first field's pattern. The tag is arbitrary, this
script generates one based on the domain name.

`key.table` has one entry per tag mentioned in `signing.table`. The first field is the
tag, the second is a colon-delimited set of information: a domain name, a selector value
and the name of a key file to use for signing. Note that the domain doesn't have to be
the domain of the email sender, it's simply the domain under which DKIM public keys for
signature validation will be looked up. This script configures things so that the DKIM
public keys will be under the domain the email is from. The key files in the final field
will be located in `/etc/opendkim/keys`, the standard location, and follow the pattern of
the key name, a dot, the selector value and the suffix `.key`.

The script completely regenerates these two files based on the information in `domains.ini`
and the selector value (whether auto-generated or supplied), so once the private keys are
uploaded to `/etc/opendkim/keys` you can just upload the new `signing.table` and `key.table`
files to `/etc/opendkim` and restart the OpenDKIM daemon to begin using the new keys for
outgoing mail.

Neither of these files affects checking of incoming mail, that's done based on the domain
and selector information the sender's DKIM software put into the signature header.

# Standard installation and workflow

The recommended setup is to have two directories, a binaries directory where the
`genkeys.py` script and the various `dnsapi_*.py` scripts are installed and a data
directory where your configuration files and data files are located. The binaries
directory doesn't need to be in your path, if it isn't you may want an alias or
small wrapper script so you don't have to use the full path to `genkeys.py` every
time. You can put the binaries directly in the data directory, but it increases the
clutter and the changes that you'll accidentally delete the script files.

Once the two configuration files are set up, you just run `genkeys.py` with the `-n`
option at the end of the month. That will generate new private and public key files
for every domain listed using the selector value for next month and automatically
add the appropriate public-key TXT records to all domains that you've set up API
information for. For domains that either don't have a DNS API available or you don't
have (or haven't configured) information for, you'll have to update the DNS data
by hand to create the TXT records. The data for the records is in the `*.YYYYMM.txt`
files created by the script. Use the `opendkim-testkey` command to verify the records
are OK.

To activate use of the new selector and records on the first of the new month, first
upload the `*.YYYYMM.key` files containing the private keys to the server keys directory
(usually `/etc/opendkim/keys`). Then upload the newly-updated `signing.table` and
`key.table` to the server OpenDKIM configuration directory (usually `/etc/opendkim`).
Restart the OpenDKIM daemon and check for errors in the logs. A last check would be
to send an email from one OpenDKIM-enabled domain handled by your servers to another,
verifying that it gets through without any errors, that the signature was checked and
passed and that the DKIM-Signature and Authentication-Results headers are present and
sensible.

After a week or so, delete the now-outdated TXT records for the old selector from the
DNS data. That gives time for any mail stuck in a queue to get cleared out before the
necessary records disappear.

## Alternative workflows

One alternative method is to run `genkeys.py` without any options at the point where you
want to generate new keys, then immediately upload the new `.key` and `.table` files
and restart the OpenDKIM daemon to start using them. You'd use this if you're not following
a rigorous monthly key rotation schedule.

If you want to set your own selector values, say if management dictates or you need to rotate
keys more often than every month, you can pass a selector value as a command-line parameter.
`genkeys.py` will use that value as the selector instead of generating one.

Commit message:

Add ability to output the selector.

README.md, after:

# OpenDKIM genkeys tool

Copyright &copy; 2016 Todd T Knarr &lt;<tknarr@silverglass.org>&gt;

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License (included in
LICENSE.md) for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
this program. If not, see [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/)

## Summary

A tool to help with the generation of DKIM keys for use with OpenDKIM. The standard
`opendkim-genkey` tool is awkward to use, it only generates key data for a single
domain at a time and the file for the public key part that needs populated into the
DNS data, while exactly what's needed for use with BIND, isn't in a format usable by
the web-based interfaces to most DNS hosting providers. It also requires manually
updating the DNS information, a significant task when dealing with the common situation
of multiple domains. This awkwardness occurs repeatedly, since the recommendation for
DKIM is that keys be rotated (new keys generated and old keys retired) every month.

This tool takes a configuration detailing all the domains that need keys and generates
all the keys in a single operation, and for supported DNS hosting provider APIs will
automatically add the new keys to DNS for you. In the process it'll regenerate the two
configuration files OpenDKIM needs that depend on the set of domains and keys involved
and leave you with reasonably clean `.txt` files containing the DNS information for
each domain. File names follow a format that should eliminate overwriting of files
unless you deliberately ask for that.

You will need to be familiar with DKIM and have at least a general familiarity with the
OpenDKIM package before using this tool.

## Usage

    genkeys.py [-h] [-n] [-v] [--no-dns] [selector]

*   `-h` : display help
*   `-n` : use next month instead of this month when automatically generating a selector
*   `-v` : log additional informational messages while processing
*   `--no-dns` : do not attempt to automatically update DNS records
*   `--selector` : output the selector and do nothing else

If no `selector` is specified, one will be automatically generated based on the current
month (or the next month if `-n` was used). Standard practice would be to omit the
selector and use automatic date-based selectors (which have the format `YYYYMM`, eg.
`201605` for May of 2016), using `-n` if you're generating the keys for next month
ahead of time and need the selector to reflect the month you're generating for rather
than the current one. If `--no-dns` is used you'll have to manually update the DNS
records with the data in the generated `.txt` files, otherwise the script will try
to automatically update the DNS records for all domains it's got DNS API support and
information for.

The `--selector` option can be used to cause the tool to output the generated selector
on standard output for capture by a script. The `-n` option can be used in conjunction
with `--selector`, other options will have no effect when `--selector` is specified.
This is to assist with scripts to automatically upload the generated data files to a
server for installation.

The following options are also available for development and debugging. They should
not be used under normal circumstances ("If you don't know what it's going to do, _DO
NOT_ push the button." is a good rule to live by).

*   `--debug` : enable logging of additional debugging information and disable actual actions
    in the DNS API modules (error checking will occur, but no attempt will be made to actually
    actually update the records)
*   `--use-null` : silently use the null DNS API instead of the defined one for all domains

## Configuration files

### `dnsapi.ini`

This file defines the global information needed by all domains hosted somewhere that uses
a given API to allow programmatic updating of DNS records. There's one line per API with
fields within the line separated by whitespace. The first field is always the name of the
API. Following that will be fields containing any data needed by the API that isn't specific
to a particular domain, eg. account authentication keys. If you look at the example file
provided with the scripts, it contains comments describing the setup for the two supported
APIs, `freedns` and `linode`, along with the `null` API used for debugging. Blank lines are
ignored, as are lines which start with a `#` character (comment lines).

A DNS API with a particular name is supported by a module in a file named `dnsapi_X.py`,
where the X is replaced with the name in the first field of the API's line in `dnsapi.ini`.
The names are arbitrary but should be mnemonic, and they aren't hardcoded into the main
script in any way. Additional APIs can be supported merely by creating a `dnsapi_X.py` module
for them and adding an entry to `dnsapi.ini`, the main script will automatically load the
module as needed. Writing these scripts is beyond the scope of this document, you can find
information on the process in the wiki's
[Writing a new DNS API module](https://github.com/tknarr/opendkim-genkeys/wiki/Writing-a-new-DNS-API-module)
page.

### `domains.ini`

This file is the main one that ties domains, key files and DNS APIs together. As with `dnsapi.ini`,
blank lines and lines beginning with `#` are ignored. The first field in each line is the
domain name, the second field is the name identifying the key to be used for that domain, and
the third field if present is the name of the DNS API used by the provider hosting that domain's
DNS. Additional fields may be present after the third containing data specific to that domain's
DNS data needed by the API, eg. domain identifiers telling the provider which of your domains
that particular record is to be added to. Specific details about these fields and how to obtain
the data can be found in the wiki in the provider's entry on the
[DNS APIs page](https://github.com/tknarr/opendkim-genkeys/wiki/DNS-APIs). If no DNS API name is
present, the script won't attempt to automatically update the DNS information and you'll need to
take the information from the generated public key file and update the DNS data manually. If a
DNS API name is present (and the information in `dnsapi.ini` and `domains.ini` is all correct),
the script will use the API to add the new DKIM record automatically (you can suppress this via
the `--no-dns` option).

When selecting key names for each domain, recommended practice is to use a short form of the domain
name or something mnemonic for a group of related domains. Good practice is that you shouldn't use
the same key across many domains, but closely-related domains (eg. `example.com` and `example.net`
when they're just synonyms for each other) might both reasonably use key `example`.

# Generated files

## Private and public key files

Both types of files follow the same pattern for the base filename: the key name, a dot and
the selector value. Private key files have the suffix `.key` and are uploaded to the mail
server to be used for signing outgoing messages. Public key data files have the suffix `.txt`
and contain the text needed in the body of the DKIM DNS TXT record to allow receiving mail
servers to verify the DKIM signature. Private key files are a base64-encoded RSA private key
file (familiar if you've worked with SSL or X.509). The public key data files are also
mostly base64-encoded data, broken up into chunks of less than 255 characters (because of
limitations in the size of the UDP packets most commonly used by DNS) and with each chunk
enclosed in quote marks. That's the format BIND zone files want the data in. Depending on
your DNS software or DNS hosting provider, you may need to reformat the text. Linode, for
example, requires that you remove the quote marks and intervening whitespace, turning the
data into a single long string before putting it in the record's value field. There are too
many possible variations to cover here, if your DNS hosting provider's not supported by a
DNS API module or you need to update DNS software directly you'll need to research what format
is required and look over the `.txt` files to see what you need to do with the data.

## Updated `opendkim` daemon configuration files

OpenDKIM uses two configuration files to control what keys are used to sign outgoing
messages: `signing.table` and `key.table`. `signing.table` is the simplest one, the first
field is a pattern matching email addresses (usually `*@domain` to match all addresses
in a given domain) and the second field is a tag used to determine what key entry will
be used to sign messages matching the first field's pattern. The tag is arbitrary, this
script generates one based on the domain name.

`key.table` has one entry per tag mentioned in `signing.table`. The first field is the
tag, the second is a colon-delimited set of information: a domain name, a selector value
and the name of a key file to use for signing. Note that the domain doesn't have to be
the domain of the email sender, it's simply the domain under which DKIM public keys for
signature validation will be looked up. This script configures things so that the DKIM
public keys will be under the domain the email is from. The key files in the final field
will be located in `/etc/opendkim/keys`, the standard location, and follow the pattern of
the key name, a dot, the selector value and the suffix `.key`.

The script completely regenerates these two files based on the information in `domains.ini`
and the selector value (whether auto-generated or supplied), so once the private keys are
uploaded to `/etc/opendkim/keys` you can just upload the new `signing.table` and `key.table`
files to `/etc/opendkim` and restart the OpenDKIM daemon to begin using the new keys for
outgoing mail.

Neither of these files affects checking of incoming mail, that's done based on the domain
and selector information the sender's DKIM software put into the signature header.

# Standard installation and workflow

The recommended setup is to have two directories, a binaries directory where the
`genkeys.py` script and the various `dnsapi_*.py` scripts are installed and a data
directory where your configuration files and data files are located. The binaries
directory doesn't need to be in your path, if it isn't you may want an alias or
small wrapper script so you don't have to use the full path to `genkeys.py` every
time. You can put the binaries directly in the data directory, but it increases the
clutter and the changes that you'll accidentally delete the script files.

Once the two configuration files are set up, you just run `genkeys.py` with the `-n`
option at the end of the month. That will generate new private and public key files
for every domain listed using the selector value for next month and automatically
add the appropriate public-key TXT records to all domains that you've set up API
information for. For domains that either don't have a DNS API available or you don't
have (or haven't configured) information for, you'll have to update the DNS data
by hand to create the TXT records. The data for the records is in the `*.YYYYMM.txt`
files created by the script. Use the `opendkim-testkey` command to verify the records
are OK.

To activate use of the new selector and records on the first of the new month, first
upload the `*.YYYYMM.key` files containing the private keys to the server keys directory
(usually `/etc/opendkim/keys`). Then upload the newly-updated `signing.table` and
`key.table` to the server OpenDKIM configuration directory (usually `/etc/opendkim`).
Restart the OpenDKIM daemon and check for errors in the logs. A last check would be
to send an email from one OpenDKIM-enabled domain handled by your servers to another,
verifying that it gets through without any errors, that the signature was checked and
passed and that the DKIM-Signature and Authentication-Results headers are present and
sensible.

After a week or so, delete the now-outdated TXT records for the old selector from the
DNS data. That gives time for any mail stuck in a queue to get cleared out before the
necessary records disappear.

## Alternative workflows

One alternative method is to run `genkeys.py` without any options at the point where you
want to generate new keys, then immediately upload the new `.key` and `.table` files
and restart the OpenDKIM daemon to start using them. You'd use this if you're not following
a rigorous monthly key rotation schedule.

If you want to set your own selector values, say if management dictates or you need to rotate
keys more often than every month, you can pass a selector value as a command-line parameter.
`genkeys.py` will use that value as the selector instead of generating one.
